Hello there.
This is the La Rue.
And welcome back.
Now, let's look at another fundamental class in the Java Lang package, which is the math class.
Math class is a utility class, which means that it offers many utility methods.
That is very useful methods.
And these methods are static methods.
And these methods help in performing numeric operations.
For instance, there is a method for generating random numbers.
Similarly, there are methods for computing maximum or minimum of two values, and there are also methods
for performing logarithmic as well as trigonometric functions.
So these are very useful methods, and all the methods in the math class are static methods, which
means that there is no point in creating an instance of the math class.
In fact, math class is non intangible, which means that you cannot create an object of the math class.
And how that is possible is something that we will look at at the end of the lecture.
So let's go ahead and look at very commonly used methods within the math class.
Now, since this is about math class, let's name our method as math demo within our basics demo class
and let's allow Eclipse to auto generate the method for us.
Just hover over it and we have the method here.
So first, let's just consider a simple lottery game.
We know that in lottery, one of the customers will be picked as a winner.
So let's say there are 100 customers and each of them have been assigned a unique number from 1 to 100.
And we need to draw the lottery.
So one of them will be picked as the winner.
So the lottery would be one of the numbers that would be picked up.
So for that, we can use a method called as random because we need to randomly pick one of the winners.
So we will say math, not random.
So random is a static method.
So like I said, every method is static here and it returns a double and it returns a double in between
zero and one.
So the value that is returned will be greater than or equal to zero and less than one, which means
that zero is inclusive, but one is exclusive.
So let's just double click here.
So it returns a double value notation wise.
If it is inclusive, we will say zero or we will use a square bracket.
And since we are saying one is exclusive, we will use a parentheses.
So that's the generic notation.
So it's going to return a value between zero and one, right?
So we'll set double.
Random is equal to this.
So that's a variable name.
But we want a value between one and 100.
So since we want a value between one and 100, what we can do is we will just multiply this random with
100 and we want an end value so we don't need a double.
So we will apply a cast here.
And when we apply a cast, the number will be truncated.
We know that.
But if this random number that is generated is, let's say, zero, in which case this expression will
be zero.
But our number starts from one, which means that we need to add a one here.
And this will give us our lucky winner.
So if it returns a value like C .999, so that would be 0.999 times 100, which would be 99.9.
And when it is when we apply the cast, it will become 99.
And when we add one, that will be 100.
So that's how 100 would be generated.
So let's go ahead and print these values first.
Let's print random here.
Then just type in this out and control space.
And our lucky winner.
So let me just go ahead and run this.
So here the random number that is returned as this.
And the winner is the one with the number 34.
Let me run it one more time.
So this time it is .41 and four two.
So that's how you would use a random method to generate random numbers.
In fact, there is a class called random and it has many methods.
This random method also internally uses that class, but it is generally preferable to use that random
class in order to generate random numbers.
But here, since we are dealing with math class, we are not going to discuss about random class.
So you can explore a random class later on.
So but that's just for your information.
And random number generator generation is also useful in many other applications like cryptography.
Or if you want to generate passwords, automatically generate passwords, then it's very useful.
So this is one application.
Next, let's look at rounding methods.
So let's say if there is a distance between two points, between two places like Los Angeles and San
Francisco, and let's say the distances, let's say 24.5.
But in our application, we would want to show that number as an integer rather than a float.
So 24.45 could be the actual distance between the two points.
But to the user, we might want to show it as 24 or 25.
So for that, you would use.
Rounding methods and rounding methods, as the name suggests, will help in rounding a floating point
value.
To the nearest integer and there are a bunch of methods for that.
And first one, let's look at this method called math dot round.
And as you can see, they are overloaded methods.
One is taking a double and the other one is taking a float.
So both of them will return the nearest integer value.
But this one, the first one will return a long it takes it double and returns along.
The second one takes a float and it returns an end.
Maybe that is because this is 64 bit and this is also 64 bit and this is 32 and INT is also 32.
So let's go ahead and try both of these.
So let's say 24.45.
So that's a double.
So it has to return a long.
So if you assign it to, let's say, an end, it will give us a compilation error, right?
Because it is returning a long.
So we need to either cast or change this too long.
Similarly.
Let's use this next one.
The other overloaded method which takes.
That's at 24.5.
And in this case, let's give you a float literal.
So if it is float, then it returns an end.
So let's go ahead and print these two values now.
The second one is distance to.
So as you can see, the first one is returning 24 because 24 is the nearest integer value to 24.45.
But if it is 24.5, that is it is halfway, then it is returning 25.
So that's the wrong methods.
But in this case, it is either returning the lowest, the nearest integer value.
But if you always want to return an integer value that is always greater than or equal to this input
argument, which means that you want to do a round up always.
In this case, it could be round up or round down, depending upon the argument.
But if you always want to round up, then you would use a method called seal.
So there is a method called SEAL.
As the name implies, it does a round up like a sealing.
All right, so let's take math, dot seal.
So it takes a double and it returns a double.
The round method is returning a longer end, but SEAL is returning a double value.
So let's just take the same example 24.45.
And it would return.
It would return 25.
So here.
Let's just call it a seal one to keep it simple.
Next, let's take another example and.
Let's say 25 point.
Fine.
Let's just keep it as 1 to 5 itself, which is also an integer value.
And.
Okay.
So let me just run this.
So in the first case, it is written in 25 or 24.45 because it has been rounded up.
And in the second case also it returns 25.
The input is 25 and the output is also 25 because SEAL is going to return the smallest double value
that is greater than or equal to the argument.
So since it says equal to also so it is going to return the smallest integer value that is greater than
or equal to.
In this case it is equal to and hence it has written 25.
So this is the smallest value that is equal to 25.
So that's what the description says.
That's it.
So here we are doing a round up.
It's already always doing a round up.
So even if it is 24.01, it would return a 25.
Here it is.
Now, if you want to do the opposite, which is to do a round down, then we will use a method called
flow.
So it's also very appropriately named.
This is seal and that is flow for round on seal.
It is round up for Florida's round.
So let's go ahead and test that also.
This would be round done.
Let me just copy all of these here.
Let's call it as floor one.
Floor to.
Okay.
So let's run it.
So as you can see in this case.
Sorry, this needs to be floor.
Sorry for that.
So as you can see, it is returning 24.
And the input argument is 24.45.
For 25, it is still returning 25 because just like in the case of seal here, it says returns the largest
double value that is less than or equal to the argument.
So for 25, it is also returning 25.
So those are round up and round down very useful methods.
Now next, let's say we want to compute minimum and max of two numbers.
If you want Max, there is a method called Max here and it is also an overloaded method and you can
see the different parameters that it has.
So let's just pick this one and it should be very easy.
24.4, five and 2520 4.5, let's say.
Okay.
So it returns 24.5 because that is greater than 24.45.
So that's how you would compute, Max.
And similarly, there is also men.
Now, if you want to compute, let's say absolute value, absolute value would be the positive value
of the given number.
Even if the given number is negative, it would return a positive value of that number.
So for that, there is this method called ABS, which stands for Absolute.
Let's just give it a double 24.45 and it would return a positive value.
So let's assign it to double.
Let's call it as abs.
Search Results 24 positive 24.45 Even if it is positive, then it will still be 24.45.
Even if you give it like this.
Plus it would still be 24.45.
Next, let's look at the power function.
So there is a method called power.
It takes two doubles and it says returns the value of the first argument raised to the power of the
second argument.
So let's say we want to compute two raised to the power of four.
Then you can use this method.
Okay.
So does it return returns 16.
So that's the power.
Now there is also square root.
So it will square root.
It will be as q, r t and it takes a double.
So let's just give our power value, which we just computed the power value.
So square root of 16 will be four.
Similarly, there is also.
Q Broad.
Let's just call it as square root.
So squared off 16 is four.
So there is also cube root.
Now the square root, if you give a negative number, then it would be an invalid operation.
So in that case, it returns something called Nan.
Nan stands for not a number, since this would be an meaningless operation.
So this method would return the special value, double value called NAN, which stands for not a number.
So that's also meaningfully named here.
So if you do this, it will be Nan.
So here, if we hover on this, it gives the description.
So if you go down here, it says the it returns.
The positive square root of a a is the parameter.
But if the argument is Nan, in this case it is Nan.
Then in that case it returns in Nan.
For example, if it is less than zero, sorry.
If it is less than zero, it would return an n.
But if the argument is also a nan, then it will also return nan.
For instance, here, another example of Nan would be.
A 00.0 divided by 0.0.
So any floating point operation which results in an undefined value, then we get a none.
So here, this output of this is none.
So once again, it returns none.
So none as undefined value.
It's not a number.
So just keep that in mind.
So if you do 0.0 divided by 0.0.
So that is a none.
So let me just let's do it this way.
So our double zero divided by 800.
And let's just copy it here and let's actually print this nine here.
It will also print now.
So this is a not a number.
So that's that.
Similarly, there are also logarithmic functions.
Okay.
So let me just say math dot log.
So this is the natural logarithm and log ten is has the base ten here.
So if at all you are interested in finding logarithmic.
If you want to use logarithmic functions, then you can use this.
So I'll just give you a nice, simple, interesting example.
Let's say there is a technology website and it has 100 documents.
Documents could be about any technology, but let's say there is an article here which is about, say,
introduction to machine learning.
Machine learning is a very hot topic now.
So and let's say this document or the Web page, it has this word called deep learning, which is a
very popular machine learning algorithm.
So if this phrase appears in this document, potentially, this is a very important document, very
important keyword for this.
But in order to measure the importance of this keyword within this particular web page, so we can do
this, so 100 would be the total number of Web pages and maybe deep learning.
This keyword appears in only, let's say, eight documents.
So in order to measure the importance of this word within this particular document, so this is a measure
that is used and it's very popular and in search engines and other areas, it's very popularly used
and it's only one metric and it's called as inverse document frequency.
So because my background is in data mining and search, so I have used this many times.
So just, just to inspire you, I'm just giving you this example.
So this is called as IDF, it is typically used in combination with another metric called term frequency.
So this is what it is.
So let me just say this out idea.
So if we run this, so it returns certain value.
So that's the idea of value.
So if at all, we want to extract all the important keywords that a particular document represents.
So this is one metric that can be used for that.
So that's how you would use Logarithmic.
And there are also trigonometric functions.
And I would like you to just explore the math class in the Java API.
So just Google for math and just plug in the latest Java version like Java 14 or whatever is the latest
and you will see the API and you can explore more methods.
Now earlier I said that math class has only static methods and hence there is no point in instantiating
it.
So indeed math class is not intangible here.
So here it gives a compilation error and it says the constructor math is not visible.
So if you go into the math class, so let me just click f three here so we can see that the constructor
has the private access modifier.
So even X constructors can have such access modifiers.
And if you say private, then it would make this particular class non instantiate.
Well in fact there is an item in effective Java, it is an item number four.
It says enforce non instantiate ability with a private constructor.
So that is what this particular class is doing because it is meaningless to create an object of this
because all of the methods are static methods.
So if you are providing such kind of utility class, you can create such kind of private constructor.
For instance, even here in this class, maybe we can say basics for our basics demo class, we can
just say basic demo, and we can have our constructor here and it can be a.
Private constructor.
And if you do that, then the the basics demo class will not be instantiate.
So that's just for your information here.
So that's the private constructor.
So that's about it.
So that's the math class.
And we looked at some very useful methods here and thank you and I will see you in the next lecture.